+++
title = "The Trump Tariffs: Some Notes from the Antipodes"
date = 2025-05-19
+++

The Australian state is currently caught in a cleft stick, like so many
of its Asian neighbours. For us, the intertwined, yet conflicting, economic and political
alliances with the US and China comprise the uneasy terrain within which
Australia has responded to Trump's recent tariff announcements.

<!-- more -->
{{ img(path="@/dossiers/tariffs/Clearingouse_051925_media/clearinghouse.png", 
alt="", caption="Australia's second largest goods export to the US is gold.", extended_width_pct=-1) }}

*First installment of the dossier* Madness and Civilization: International Perspectives on the MAGA 2.0 Tariffs, *edited by the Heatwave media collective*
<br />

---

<br />

**By Clearinghouse**[^1]

 <center>
 
"You can't believe how much fun we're having."

&mdash; a Trump aide
</center>


<font style="font-family: Arial, sans-serif; font-size:55pt; font-style:regular; width: .80em; font-weight: 400; line-height: 52px; float: left; color:rgb(255, 254, 255); padding-top: 10px; padding-bottom: 5px; padding-right: 5px; padding-left: -5px;  margin-right: -5px; margin-bottom: -5px;">T</font>he Australian state is currently caught in a cleft stick, like so many
of its Asian neighbours.[^2] Long a junior partner to the United States
within the Asia-Pacific, it has provided a broad suite of military and
intelligence support since the Second World War: from troops for US-led
military conflicts (Korea, Vietnam, Iraq, Afghanistan) through to bases
for US military and regional surveillance. Most recently, there has been
the AUKUS agreement which &mdash; supported by all the major political
parties &mdash; was sealed with an agreement to buy US-made nuclear submarines
(that some commentators now fear may never arrive). Meanwhile, over the
last fifteen years or so, China has overtaken Japan as Australia's major
trading partner,[^3] a situation common to economies across the region.
Along with raw materials such as iron ore, gold and petroleum gas, a
range of services are sold to China, including tourism and
post-secondary education.[^4] Overall, however, the economy in Australia
is notably "less complex than expected for its income level".[^5]
Despite some setbacks under the previous federal government, which led
to a temporary exclusion of certain local industries from the Chinese
market, this connection with the PRC is celebrated in Australian
business and political circles alike as proof of a natural "fit" that
epitomises the concept of comparative advantage. Thus it is no surprise
to hear the head of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
stating recently that "It would certainly not be in Australia's
interest to be \... contemplating that we would impose trade measures in
alignment with the United States".[^6] How best to maintain
this ménage à trois, given the apparent rising tensions between China
and the US, is a puzzle whose solution has so far eluded the Australian
political class. Whether there is movement on this front, now that the
recent federal election has seen the Labor Party government returned,
remains to be seen.
<br />
<br />
For us, the intertwined, yet conflicting, economic and political
alliances with the US and China comprise the uneasy terrain within which
Australia has responded to Trump's recent tariff announcements.
On April 3rd, Prime Minister Albanese developed an initial 5-point plan:

> 1\. Provide A\$50 million to peak bodies within sectors hit by
> tariffs, to aid in finding new markets
>
> 2\. Establish an AUD\$1 billion economic resilience program to provide
> interest-free loans to enterprises wishing to take advantage of new
> markets and export opportunities.
>
> 3\. Establish a critical minerals reserve - a stockpile of key
> minerals held back from export.
>
> 4\. Prioritise Australian businesses in government procurement
> contracts.
>
> 5\. Strengthen laws against commodity dumping.[^7]

Albanese commented that "all these countries (United States, European
Union, Canada, Japan, South Korea etc) are investing in their industrial
base, their manufacturing capability and their economic sovereignty.
This is not old fashioned protectionism or isolationism. It is the new
competition."[^8]
<br />
<br />
The Australian Manufacturing Workers Union (AMWU) has likewise responded
to the tariffs, calling on the government to mandate the use of
Australian metals in all domestic infrastructure and energy
projects.[^9] The Australian Workers' Union made a similar call.[^10]
The AMWU has a particular focus on aluminium and steel industries, as
well as advanced manufacturing and component production through small
and medium enterprises. The AMWU's response also included reference to
the idea of "green metals," a discourse that is becoming more common in
the global context of renewable energy transitions. The national peak
union body, the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) has welcomed
the government's plans.[^11] This is unsurprising given the deep ties
between the union bureaucracy and the Labor Party. Unions once again
wish to guide the government's response, in the same way that the AMWU
and other unions responded to the Senate inquiry into the "Future Made
In Australia" bill.[^12]

 <center>
 
\*\*\*
</center>

Direct impacts to Australia's trade with the US have been limited so
far, with the US accounting for only 6% of Australia's goods exports in
2023-24.[^13] Australia's main exports to the US are services, which
can't be tariffed as easily as goods arriving in a port. However, 26% of
Australia's two-way trade is with China,[^14] and while decreased
exports to the US may not deeply affect primary producers in Australia,
greater impacts may be felt if the Chinese and Southeast Asian markets
contract and demand for Australian goods and services declines.[^15] In
the meantime, some Australian industries may benefit from the
reconfiguring of global trade.
<br />
<br />
Currently Australia's most valuable goods export to the US is beef.
Since the tariffs were announced, Australian beef exports to China have
increased dramatically, filling the void left by the complete halting of
US beef sales to China. Australian beef exports to China increased in
February-March 2025, up 40% compared to the same period last year.[^16]
<br />
<br />
Australia's second largest goods export to the US is gold. While not
directly related to the tariffs, gold prices have drastically increased
over the last year as the gold fetishists in the world's Central Banks
rush to buy up gold bullion. So far, this has not led to increased
investment in gold exploration in Australia. Instead, capital is flowing
more rapidly into existing ventures, allowing mining enterprises to
exploit known, lower-yield deposits that were previously too
labour-intensive to mine profitably.[^17]

 <center>
 
\*\*\*
</center>

Viewed from the perspective of the local dominant class here, the tariff
regime may be less the central issue &mdash; especially as it remains unclear
what commodities will still be subject to customs duties in three
months' time, and at what rate &mdash; than what (if at any) broader plans
exist on the part of the US state for rejigging its complex relationship
with China. If this is indeed the former's long-anticipated move to
finally and decisively decouple the PRC's economy "from the upper
segments of the world market to which Beijing continues to strive to
secure access,"[^18] it seems to have been very poorly executed, to say
the least. Not only is the whole thing chaotic and capricious, but
Trump's penchant for talking big with threats, only to back down, has
not been lost on the CCP (or US Treasury bond markets, for that matter).
Much will depend on whether the newly-imposed 10% tariff on Australian
goods stays in place &mdash; if so, little may change for the local state's
economic and strategic policies in the region. As for the choices made
by other Asia-Pacific social formations, many of which face similar
dilemmas, we will have to wait and see, although increased commerce
within the region itself seems probable. Finally, those fractions of
local capital which have invested heavily in the US, such as the
powerful superannuation industry managing almost $US2.6 trillion in
pension funds, must be reassessing their offshore exposure policies
after disastrous losses on Wall Street following "Liberation
Day".[^19]
<br />
<br />
As elsewhere, the Chinese government has made overtures to Australia,
inviting Australia to "join hands" in solidarity with China in the face
of the tariffs. During the recent election campaign, Defence Minister
Richard Marles refused Ambassador Xiao Qian's offer point blank, arguing
that Australia should instead pursue deeper ties with Indonesia, India,
the UK and the UAE. However, other sources within the Federal government
have hinted that trade with China could deepen, provided it happens on
Australia's terms.[^20]

 <center>

\*\*\*
</center>

Australia has unique protections in industries such as pharmaceuticals,
medical devices, agriculture (particularly beef), and the much smaller
steel and aluminium industries.[^21] Also under threat is the media
bargaining code which forces large companies to pay for hosting news in
Australia, as well as the recent social media ban for children under 16.
Silicon Valley technocrats despise these practices, and despite their
occasional opposition to Trump, are fairly happy to see him on the
attack. Critical minerals, especially in the context of Ukraine, are
becoming more and more important in the looming tech/arms race.
According to one site, "recently Japan, Korea and some European nations
have either signed agreements or started talks with the Albanese
Government to secure access to Australian minerals."[^22]
<br />
With the current absence of any collective subject within the region to
serve as a reference point, talk of identifying "openings" strikes us as
premature. As for identifying local and regional factors, this presumes
a) a detailed mapping of the hierarchies of labour-power across the
Asia-Pacific b) an understanding of the various regimes of accumulation
and value chains operating there, and how these articulate with both the
US and Chinese economies c) a materialist analysis of regional
geopolitics informed by a) and b). To date we have yet to encounter even
the beginnings of any such analysis in or about our wider region, which
is both why we have started our own [modest
project](https://clearinghouse.noblogs.org/), and are keen
to engage with others pondering these same problems. It is also why,
however inadequate our own provisional responses to *Heatwave*'s
questions might be, we have thought it worthwhile to make some sort of
initial contribution to what can only be a much broader collective
process.
<br />
<br />
With that said, discontent around the cost of living (particularly
housing, but also utilities) has been simmering within Australia since
at least the outbreak of COVID in the ashes of the summer bushfires of
2019-2020. The extensive and intensive lockdowns in key parts of the
country revealed for a brief moment the population's dependence on
so-called "essential service" workers, while exacerbating divisions
between those who were able to receive a regular income while working
from home, and everybody else. Many contradictions surrounding "the
Australian way of life" were already in plain sight by this point of
time, and have only continued to feed this growing unease: the place of
First Nations people within the polity; the sharp uptick in reportings
of domestic violence; the meaning of "Australia the multicultural
society"; growing portents of climate catastrophe (from floods to
bushfires); debates around "appropriate" levels of migration; the degree
of unpaid overtime for those in paid work; the difficulties facing the
unwaged; increases in international tensions, from the genocide in Gaza
to the war in Ukraine. Back in late 2020, one Italian friend flagged the
challenges at that point facing efforts at "creating a general movement
that, in starting from a particular terrain, is able to make one
specific problem vital for the broad spectrum of the exploited."[^23]
Leaving aside for the moment the question of how future processes of
class recomposition might actually be enacted, their ongoing absence has
meant that discontent here has instead expressed itself in a number of
(refracted? deflected?) forms, from a drop in support for both major
parties, to a minor rise in trade union membership. Despite these
simmering discontents, Australia has been notable for the absence of
generalised struggles (organised or otherwise).

 <center>
 
\*\*\*
</center>

Like other social formations in the region, Australia is largely subject
to the fallout arising from the actions that bigger players enact as
they jostle within the world market. While economic nationalism
continues to be the dominant ideology of the local trade union movement,
the liberalisation of trade and subsequent downscaling of manufacturing
since the 1980s has turned this strategy into an uphill battle,
beginning with the abolition of tariffs in the domestic textiles,
clothing and footwear sectors in the 1980s, and culminating in the
destruction of local auto production in the late 2010s. However, even
before Trump's re-election, the federal government has lately begun
talking of reviving certain local manufacturing sectors under the slogan
"Building a Future Made in Australia," in an effort to reverse decades
of deindustrialisation following similar moves from Japan, South Korea,
Canada and the US. Geopolitically, this is conceived in terms of
leveraging Australia's role as a longstanding "middle" power within the
US global security system. In the last few weeks, there has been talk of
using the country's considerable rare earths deposits as a bargaining
chip &mdash; in the first instance, as a means to reduce "reciprocal" tariffs.
For now, at least, the security alliance with the US remains part of
mainstream political "common sense", although opinion polls suggest a
marked "public" shift against it.[^24] That said, even the opposition
conservatives concede that "President Trump is somebody who is hard to
predict, and we need to be able to defend ourselves."[^25]
<br />
<br />
As the dust settles following the Federal election on May 3rd that saw
the Labor Party clench a second term, Australia appears to be in a
holding pattern, albeit an uneasy one. Rather than a slide rightward,
the centre seems to be holding for now. In the terrain of economy alone,
Australia's position within global supply chains as an exporter of raw
materials (most significantly of iron ore, coal and gas) has thus far
provided a strong buffer against the economic turbulence of the 1990s
and 2000s, with the national economy recording its first recession since
1991 in 2020, before restoring growth in the years since. Nevertheless,
given that foreign direct investment into Australia was $4.7 trillion
in 2023, some 181% of the year's GDP,[^26] it seems fairly reasonable
that Australian growth may suffer with the retraction of global
investment spurred on by the tariffs. More work needs to be done on the
nature of investment here, and the relative importance of
value-productive industry versus large private equity firms and
financial instruments/services. The tariffs remind us that, while at
once a major source of its wealth, Australia's dependence on exports
casts the fate of the national economy on the shifting sands of the
world market, a totality which increasingly appears "to lurch from
crisis to war."[^27]
<br />
<br />
Correspondence is welcomed at [clearinghouse@proton.me](mailto:clearinghouse@proton.me)
<br />

---
[^1]: [Clearinghouse](https://clearinghouse.noblogs.org/) is produced by
    a communist research collective scattered around the smallest
    continent. We intend to provide a variety of resources &mdash; starting
    with periodic reflections, reference lists, and interviews &mdash; all
    towards a better shared understanding of class conflict,
    accumulation regimes and geopolitics in the region and beyond.
    Correspondence is welcomed: **clearinghouse \[at\] proton.me.**

[^2]: Saleha Mosin and Carter Johnson, "[Markets are discovering the
    real Trump trade is 'Sell
    America](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2025-04-21/trump-s-trade-war-puts-us-dollar-bonds-safe-haven-status-at-risk).'"

[^3]: Australian Government, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
    "[China Country
    Brief](https://www.dfat.gov.au/geo/china/china-country-brief)."

[^4]: Australian Government, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
    "[ChAFTA fact sheet: Trade in
    services](https://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/in-force/chafta/fact-sheets/Pages/chafta-fact-sheet-trade-in-services)."

[^5]: Growth Lab,
    "[Australia](https://atlas.hks.harvard.edu/countries/36)."

[^6]: Ronald Mizen, "[The alarming next step in Trump's trade war that
    has CEOs
    rattled](https://www.afr.com/politics/federal/the-alarming-next-step-in-trump-s-trade-war-that-has-ceos-rattled-20250410-p5lqr9)."

[^7]: Samantha Dick, "[Albanese outlines five-point plan to respond to
    Donald Trump's
    tariffs](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-04-03/albanese-outlines-five-point-plan-trump-tariffs-election-2025/105131590)."

[^8]: Anthony Albanese, "[A future made in Australia: address to
    Queensland Media
    Club](https://anthonyalbanese.com.au/media-centre/a-future-made-in-australia-qmc)."

[^9]: Australian Manufacturing Workers Union, "[AMWU urges Federal
    government to shift industry policy after US steel, aluminium
    tariffs](https://www.amwu.org.au/amwu_urges_federal_government_to_shift_industry_policy_after_us_steel_aluminium_tariffs)."

[^10]: Australian Workers' Union, "[Australia can thrive through
    Trump's tariffs with decisive
    action."](https://awu.net.au/national/news/2025/03/22308/australia-can-thrive-through-trumps-tariffs-with-decisive-action/)

[^11]: Australian Council of Trade Unions, "[Response to Trump must be
    to protect and grow Australian
    jobs](https://www.actu.org.au/media-release/response-to-trump-must-be-to-protect-and-grow-australian-jobs/)."

[^12]: Parliament of Australia, "[Senate inquiry into the provisions of
    Future Made in Australia Bill 2024 and the Future Made in Australia
    (Omnibus Amendments No. 1) Bill
    2024](https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Economics/FutureMadeinAustralia/Submissions)."

[^13]: Clint Jasper, "[Here's what Australia sells overseas, who buys
    it, and how much we sell to the
    US."](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-04-04/us-tariffs-what-does-australia-export-trade-data/105045224)

[^14]: Australian Government, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
    "[China Country
    Brief](https://www.dfat.gov.au/geo/china/china-country-brief#:~:text=China%20is%20Australia's%20largest%20two,%24212.7%20billion%20in%202023%2D24)."

[^15]: Australian Bureau of Statistics, "[International trade -
    supplementary information by calendar
    year](https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/economy/international-trade/international-trade-supplementary-information-calendar-year/latest-release)."

[^16]: Matt Bran, "[Tariff war halts US beef exports to China as
    Australia fills the
    gap](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-04-12/us-tariffs-war-with-china-australian-beef-exports-up/105166632)."

[^17]: Samuel Yang, "[Inside Australia's new gold rush as miners cash
    in on record
    prices](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-04-08/australia-new-gold-rush-driven-by-high-price-and-demand/105064920)."

[^18]: Raffaele Sciortino (2024), *The US--China Rift and Its Impact on
    Globalisation*, Haymarket, p. 4.]

[^19]: Hugh Piper, "[Australia Needs a Foreign Policy for its
    Superannuation
    Sector](https://www.internationalaffairs.org.au/australianoutlook/australias-needs-a-foreign-policy-for-its-superannuation-sector/)."

[^20]: Tom Crowley & Stephen Dziedzic, "[Australia will not join hands
    with China against
    Trump](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-04-10/australia-will-not-join-hands-with-china-against-trump/105159274)."

[^21]: Emilia Turzon & Ahmed Yussuf, "[As Trump's sweeping tariffs
    loom, here's what US trade looks like and where Australia
    fits](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-04-02/united-states-trade-deficits-surplus-australia-trump-tariff/105121634)."

[^22]: John Murtagh, "[ACTU welcomes worker-focused response to unfair
    US
    tariffs](https://psnews.com.au/actu-welcomes-worker-focused-response-to-unfair-us-tariffs/156820/)."

[^23]: "[Neopopulism as geopolitics: Nick Dyer-Witheford interviews
    Raffaele
    Sciortino](https://projectpppr.org/populisms/ou4s4qbth74ibed4kkd1njv72pg40c)."

[^24]: Jason Whittaker, "[US independence day? Poll shows Australians'
    radical shift over Trump,
    economy](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-04-27/yougov-poll-united-states-alliance-donald-trump-relationship/105210660)."

[^25]: Andrew Greene, "[Shadow defence minister Andrew Hastie warns
    Australia can\'t take US alliance for granted under
    Trump](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2025-04-23/andrew-hastie-doubts-us-alliance-under-trump-election-2025/105206576)."

[^26]: Australian Government, Australian Trade and Investment
    Commission, "[Global ties and open markets - the gateway to wealthy
    Asia-Pacific markets and a solid opportunity base for global
    supply-chain
    enrichment](https://international.austrade.gov.au/en/why-australia/global-ties-and-open-markets)."

[^27]: Rafaelle Sciortino and Robert Ferro, "[Prolegomena on the
    'system of
    states',](https://endnotes.org.uk/posts/robert-ferro-raffaele-sciortino-prolegomena-on-the-system-of-states)"
    *Endnotes* blog.
