+++
title = "Madness and Capitalist Civilization"
date = 2025-05-20
+++

Even before "Liberation Day," our social media feeds were awash with the
speculation and drama of the second Trump administration. The exigencies
of daily life make it difficult if not impossible to stay up-to-date on
all the horrors and indignities. 

<!-- more -->
{{ img(path="@/magazine/issue1/magazine-page-assets/dossier.png", 
alt="", caption="Trump's 'Liberation Day' announcement was ostensibly intended to rectify the U.S.'s persistent trade deficit.", extended_width_pct=-1) }}


## **International Perspectives on the MAGA 2.0 Tariffs**

<font style="font-family: Arial, sans-serif; font-size:55pt; font-style:regular; width: .80em; font-weight: 400; line-height: 52px; float: left; color:rgb(255, 254, 255); padding-top: 10px; padding-bottom: 5px; padding-right: 1px; padding-left: -5px;  margin-right: -30px; margin-bottom: -5px;">I</font>n this first dossier edited by the Heatwave media collective, we
present a series of short articles by communists from various countries
about the local impacts of the second Trump administration's
international policies &mdash; focusing specifically on the tariffs. We will
publish about one of these articles per week and then compile them into
a zine-type PDF for readers to print and distribute. This will also be
mailed to [subscribers](https://www.patreon.com/c/HeatwaveMag) as an
insert to issue 2 of our magazine. Contributions are still rolling in,
but at this point we plan to include pieces by Clearinghouse
(Australia), Réalité (France and Italy), Chuang (China/international),
Raffaele Sciortino (Italy), Marco Túlio Vieira, et al. (Brazil), and
Jamie Merchant (U.S.). If you would like to submit a piece, send a draft
(under 2,000 words) to [heatwavemag@proton.me](mailto:heatwavemag@proton.me).
<br />
<br />
Below is our overview of the dossier, with questions for consideration.
<br />
<br />
Even before "Liberation Day," our social media feeds were awash with the
speculation and drama of the second Trump administration. The exigencies
of daily life make it difficult if not impossible to stay up-to-date on
all the horrors and indignities. The list of disappearances, detentions,
and deportations grows larger every day. Foreign policy, intelligence,
and security fiascos mask the sheer violence of U.S. imperial ambitions.
Elon Musk's DOGE has liberal elites, Democratic Party officials, trade
unions, and nonprofit organizations scrambling for some kind of United
Front.
<br />
<br />
Then, on April 2, 2025, Trump signed Executive Order 14257, an extensive
set of global tariff policies that amounted to what he called a
"declaration of economic independence" for the United States. The order
imposed a minimum 10% tariff on all U.S. imports and implemented
punitive, so-called "reciprocal" tariffs on some 60 nations deemed to be
engaging in unfair trade practices. Impacting more than 100 countries,
Trump\'s \"Liberation Day\" announcement was ostensibly intended to
rectify the U.S.'s persistent trade deficit. With the stoke of a pen, he
raised tariff rates to levels not seen in over a century. Global stock
markets &mdash; already strained over the first few months of the
administration &mdash; experienced sequences of panic selling. In the
immediate aftermath of April 2, every major index plummeted, each new
day bringing another fall. Crude oil prices and other commodity futures
dropped precipitously. In that brief week, we witnessed the largest
global market crash since 2020.
<br />
<br />
At *Heatwave,* [we have taken pains to
consider](https://heatwavemag.info/magazine/issue1/preprint-editorial-031125/)
this recent flurry of events against the background of late 20th and
early 21st century social conflict. Still, events proceed too rapidly to
have the last word on the matter. The "national emergency" of American
economic decline is decidedly a global matter. Today, economic
nationalism and American revanchism are rattling the infrastructure of
global capitalism, the imperial ordering of world production. The trade
wars dominate every news cycle. Worst hit among the belligerents is
China. Now several administrations old, the U.S.-China trade war
escalated rapidly over the last couple months in an exchange of
retaliatory tariffs. In the early weeks of maneuvering, the Trump
administration raised the minimum tariff on Chinese imports to an
astounding 145%.
<br />
<br />
Domestic fears of inflation have driven bouts of panic buying, as
consumers worry over future price hikes and the prospect of recession.
Across the planet, factories idle as manufacturers assess the impact on
global supply chains. Auto manufacturers have ceased exports to the
United States, while domestic factories have laid off thousands of
workers. Despite this, UAW President Shawn Fain maintains support for
the tariffs and holds out hope for the restoration of manufacturing
employment. This perspective neglects the reality that achieving such a
revival in the U.S. would mean devastating American living standards,
unless markets can bear iPhones priced at \$3,500 (if it were even
technically possible to construct these monstrosities within a single
country). Only then would labor costs be competitive with China and the
newly industrializing economies of South and Southeast Asia within the
orbit of Chinese capital &mdash; Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand, Indonesia, and
Malaysia. Aggressive tariffs imposed on these manufacturing assembly
exporters threaten to disrupt supply chains for leading firms like
Apple, Foxconn, and Nike.
<br />
<br />
All of this seems bad for global capital. While many leftists take to
social media to laugh at falling lines and mock MAGA tech bros, some of
those very same Trump supporters and media personalities have become
vocal detractors. Esteemed publications like the *Financial Times*
have picked the policy apart in a desperate effort to suss out *some*
kind of low cunning. It would be a mistake to read conspiratorial
motivations into an administration that designed the same sort of tariff
policy that is easily generated by ChatGPT, Grok, Gemini, and other
large language models. Certainly, at times Trump and many of his
supporters seem confused on what tariffs even are, blinded as they are
by the mirage of the *Pax Americana.* From this perspective, there
doesn't appear to be a shrewd agenda from intelligent rightwing policy
architects, but instead a vulgar populism by people who may have no idea
what they're doing. At some levels of the administration, that is no
doubt the case. But viewed from the more general perspective of U.S.
imperial ambitions, the chaos need not be wholly calculated to be
effective. Moreover, as several contributors here point out, the events
as they have unfolded cleave quite closely to the course of action
advocated by Stephen Miran, Chairman of the Council of Economic
Advisers, in Hudson Bay Capital's late 2024 whitepaper "A User's Guide
to Restructuring the Global Trading System." In short, what matters is
more function than form. Quite simply, in international trade and
imperial architecture, blunt instruments sometimes work best. From this
perspective, it matters not who designed the instrument or whether it
can be mobilized for cross-purposes, but who is using it, when, and how.
Thus, the repeated rollout and recoil of tariffs functions like a whip,
intended if anything to discipline trading partners into renegotiating
trade deals to bypass multilateral agreements and the transnational
organizations that enforce them (e.g., the WTO). If it just so happens
to weaken the dollar in the process, all the better for U.S. export
competitiveness. In fact, Miran may have designs on just such an
outcome, while hedging his bets that the position of the U.S. in the
imperial structure of production is enough to maintain the dollar as
reserve currency. Time will tell.
<br />
<br />
"Manufacturing" functions as ideological cover for MAGA, to be sure, but
one that doesn\'t really align with the actual policy prescriptions of
the administration. Nor does "manufacturing revival" explain the clearly
punitive nature of 100+ reciprocal tariffs across the board. Sustaining
these arrangements would very obviously be bad for American
manufacturing over the course of Trump's reign. So as Trump raised the
tariffs on Chinese exports yet again, he simultaneously backed off most
of the reciprocal ones. Stocks rallied, as the economists say. By
mid-May, even China returned to the negotiating table, as both nations
agreed to roll back the tariffs imposed after "Liberation Day" to 10%
for 90 days. Observers shake their heads at yet another round of
madness. Consumers have little to celebrate. As of this writing, the
average effective tariff rate in the U.S. is still nearly 18%. There may
be glimmers of sanity in the apparent chaos. The administration's own
language in press releases and executive orders reflects that the
general interest was renegotiating trade relations all along. Did we
really think a superficial ideological agenda would outweigh the
stability of the economy? In *this* economy?
<br />
<br />
Lest we be caught in any illusions that Trump answers to his
petit-bourgeois MAGA "base," for whom the tariffs may appear rational,
even romantic, we must remember that Trumpism and far-right revanchism
in general express the interests of particular factions of capital
attempting to reassert control over a waning global order, dissolving
and recrystallizing into new regional territorial production complexes.
For any administration, the actual rollout of policies expresses these
conflicting interests of actual capital and capitalists, [imperial and
"subimperial" alike](https://spectrejournal.com/a-tale-of-two-ports/). If
they appear especially incoherent today it is only because Trump and his
kind represent just such a discordant harmony of cross-class and
interclass alliances, [presented as a popular
hegemony.](https://endnotes.org.uk/posts/endnotes-onward-barbarians)
The apparent paradox disappears if we reject the assumption that there
is a singular "base" at all: today\'s hegemony is the expression of real
disunity and fragmentation. Phil Neel calls this the "empire of chaos,"
following Samir Amin &mdash; a situation in which "hegemony is eroded in its
very deployment, generating a complex confluence of chaotic competing
interests as power is delegated to the peripheries." This decay is
organic to capitalist hegemony itself. We might think of it as the
madness of capitalist civilization, nakedly displayed as the system
lurches from one crisis to another. It may thus behoove us to understand
prescriptive remedies like tariffs not as some aberration brought on by
the horrible orange man, essentially exogenous to the system of free
trade and in direct contradiction with the interests of his constituency
or even his own businesses, but endogenous to a system in which the
social metabolism of the species exists only in partial fragments, as
many competing capitals, currencies, and national accounts.
<br />
<br />
As communists, how do we negotiate these spasmodic disturbances in the
planetary factory? We asked our contributors to consider the following
lines of inquiry:

1.  What has been the understanding of and response to Trump
    administration policies in the place where you live? How are
    governments responding? Workers' organizations? Political parties?

2.  Are we witnessing American economic nationalism? Why and/or why not?

3.  What key sectors and industries are affected in your area? How are
    workers in key sectors and industries affected?

4.  The tariff gamble appears to be a part of a larger, underdetermined
    set of strategies of the Trump administration. Will the hold? Why or
    why not? Are these strategies as coherent or incoherent? Are they
    self-defeating?

5.  To the extent that they persist, how might we expect the new tariff
    regime to reorder global production and trade relations? What sort
    of restructuring seems possible or likely under the current blight
    of global investment?

6.  How do local and regional conditions influence and shape the
    response to this geoeconomic shift? What openings, if any, does the
    current turbulence present for communist partisans? What local and
    regional factors must communists take into consideration?

7.  The unfolding chaotic markets and administrative gambles betray
    underlying problems of overproduction, weak profitability, and
    sluggish growth. How do we see the present situation in the short
    and longer terms?
